if your child is born with a unilateral
cleft lip and palate I'd like to discuss
with you the timeline for all the
procedures that that may be required in
the first 20 years of life normally at
approximately four months of age we
repair the lip and this involves
bringing the tissue of the lip together
and approximately nine to ten months of
age we repair the palate generally those
are the procedures that are performed in
the first year of life after the palate
repair we see the children every year in
our cleft palate clinic this is a
multidisciplinary clinic with all of the
cleft specialists closer to first grade
we generally reassess the lip and the
palate and reassess the need for any
revisions prior to entering school so
that's generally when the children are
approximately six years of age for
children who have speech difficulties
this is normally something that we pick
up in our cleft clinic during one of the
annual visits and this usually shows up
around four to five years of age
some of these children can be treated
with speech therapy alone some however
requiring a different ditional procedure
in which we either revise or redo the
cleft palate repair or do a procedure
called a pharyngeal flap which brings
tissue from the back of the throat and
attaches it to the palate then when
children are approximately nine years of
age we begin a procedure which is called
an alveolar bone graft this is a
procedure which closes this area of the
palate where the teeth come through
that's called the alveolus and then in
the teenage years up until children are
approximately 20 there are a series of
procedures which may or may not be
required some children will require
additional procedures by the
maxillofacial surgeons these are called
orthognathic procedures this may be
required to move the upper or the lower
jaw to correct any occlusal difficulties
or difficulties in the way the teeth
come together
then after this procedure the last
procedure that we occasionally do
approximately when the children are 18
to 20 years of age is one final
rhinoplasty to correct any nasal
asymmetry if you have a child with a
cleft lip or palate you can feel very
comfortable coming to Boston Children's
Hospital we have a multidisciplinary
team and we treat approximately 150 new
cleft children every year
you